Testing, testing, one, two, three, four, one,
two, three, four. One, two, three, four, testing,
one, two, three, four. This is the 3rd of April.
We're in the Cushing Library, room 207, and I have
the pleasure and honor of talking to Professor
Leonard Ponder. To introduce yourself to a reader
or a listener, give us a biographical summary of
Family background, growing up, what did mom and
dad do? Where high school, where college? What did
you do before coming to A&M? I grew up in northwest
Louisiana, a little town called Pleasant Hill.
Pleasant Hill is about 60 miles south of
Shreveport. Some people know where Shreveport is
at least. A little village of about 1,000 people.
My dad was a carpenter. I was the baby of five boys.
My youngest brother is seven years older than me,
which means I was an accident and fully expected to
be a girl. In fact, my mother quilted a pink quilt
for me, but alas, tomorrow, it didn't work out that
way. Pleasant Hill High School has fond memories
for that place. I was fortunate enough to play
basketball there. I was not a great athlete, but
Because it was a small school, nearly everyone
could play. We started in September and finished
in March. We'd play 50 or 60 games a year. So if you do
that for five or six years, counting junior high,
you get to where you can play a little. That
probably kept me in school and interested in
school until I got old enough to realize that that
was an important thing. Because in my family, my
mother went to the Eighth grade, my dad finished
the sixth grade. Of course, that's all the school
there was where they were at the time. My mother was
a teacher for a while. She passed the Louisiana
teacher's test and was able to teach for a year or
two. So I had a role model from that point of view.
From there, I went to Northwestern State
University in Natchitoches, which was about 45
minutes from where I grew up. At that time,
Northwestern had 2,500 students. And I thought,
surely I had died in going to New York City because
I'd never seen so many people in one place. After
graduating there, I went to Shreveport and taught
in a brand new school, Oak Terrace Junior High.
What? Oak Terrace Junior High. Oak Terrace, okay.
And Sunset Acres, which is the western part of, and
Blue Collar part of the town. I was a teacher and a
coach. I coached football, basketball, and
track. I played basketball and never played a down
of football. I was very poor. My one loss record in
basketball was very poor. I had a very good one loss
record in football, probably because I didn't try
to over-encompass the youngsters. But a bigger
reason was because I had a couple of players that
were pretty good. A guy named Terry Bradshaw was
one of our quarterbacks. and he was followed up by a
fellow named Joe Ferguson. And of course Haskell
knows that Bradshaw played for the Pittsburgh
Steelers and Ferguson played for the Buffalo
Bills after playing for Arkansas. So they made me
better than I was. Were you the head coach? I was
head coach. And what was the one loss record when
they were there? Well, when they were there, When
Bradshaw was there, we were like five and three. We
played eight games a year. Ferguson had a better
year. By then, we had our program going. And I
honestly don't remember the record, but it was
7-1, 6-2, something like that. But the
interesting thing was neither of those kids threw
the ball much because we didn't have anyone to
catch it. But they were leaders at that time, and we
knew they were going to be good high school
players. We didn't know whether they'd be good get
college and pros. From there, I went to
Southeastern Louisiana University and taught
for four or five years. I didn't have my doctorate
yet. You had done your master's where? I had
finished my master's at Northwestern also. While
I was teaching in Shreveport, I went back to
Northwestern and finished my master's. While at
Southeastern, it became very apparent that if I
was going to stay in higher education, I needed the
doctorate, so I took a leave of absence and went to
the University of Tennessee and got my degree
there. From Tennessee I went back to Southeastern
for a year and then came over here. What year? In
1972. 1972. I came with the whole slug of everyone
else who came in 1972. How did you and A&M get linked
together? Yeah. Like how did you know there was a
vacancy and how did they know you existed? I went to
our national meeting. In our field, the national
organization was the American Association for
Health, Physical Education, Recreation, and
Dance. And some would say possible safety. It was a
long, lengthy thing. But they had their national
meeting in Houston. And I went to that meeting. And
they have a very fine placement center. And I went
there and looked through all the job
opportunities. And of course, A&M was listed.
They also had an employee section where you could
list your credentials. So I left my credentials.
And I didn't interview there, nor did I apply for
the job. But I went back to Southeastern. And a
couple weeks, Carl Landis, who was the department
head, called me and asked me if I'd come for an
interview. And had you met him? I had never met him.
I saw him at the convention. Someone pointed him
out to me. But I had not met him. I knew no one at A&M.
Fortunately, the job that I was applying for, they
were interested in me for, was to direct allied
health education, which was a brand new thing, a
brand new thing nationally and new on this campus.
Baylor College of Medicine had gotten a grant to
prepare teachers of allied health so that they
would then in turn take faculty jobs and prepare
other allied health professionals. And there
just wasn't many applicants because no one knew
anything about it. And I didn't either, to tell you
the truth. But Carl convinced me that it was a good
opportunity. And of course, I was impressed with
A&M the minute I walked on campus. All right. And so
you drove over. I drove over. And describe the
entire visit, particularly the interview
process. I want to start back a little further than
that. Oh, okay. All right, good. My wife and I had
been married then seven, I see six, about eight
years. No, ten years, near ten years. Had never had
a vacation. So that particular summer, we decided
we would, and we had a new baby. We took baby to
grandparents, and we went down to the Gulf Coast of
Mississippi. And I lay on the beach and took in the
sun and got so sunburned we had to stand up. We
couldn't even sleep. I couldn't lay down to sleep.
And we had just come in and the phone was ringing as
we walked in the door and it was Carl Landis. And he
asked me if I would be at A&M the next day. Oh, my. And
I says, Dr. Landis, I just got here. I just don't
think I can do that. And he said, well, I'm trying to
get away on vacation. It sure would be nice. Maybe
you could come partway. And so I told him that we'd
get in. This is like 3 o'clock in the afternoon. So I
told him we'd go in as far as we could. And, in fact,
we got to Beaumont that night. And then the next day
drove on in. And I can recall driving through
Navasota. And we didn't go through Hempstead. We
came in off of 105. And it was desolate, as you
remember back then. There wasn't much back there.
And of course, Highway 6 ran right through the
heart of Navasota. We topped a hill, and there sat
A&M, like an oasis. There was nothing, and then
there was a lot. And we found G. Ryder White very
easily. And I had my wife with me, and we met with
Carl and had a good visit. Of course, Carl Landis,
as you recall, was very straight and dignified and
very formal in all he did. I don't recall all of the
interview, but I do recall the interview with
Frank Hubert, who was then dean of education.
Describe that one. We went into his office and it
was his birthday. And the secretaries had baked a
cake and he had the cake container on his desk and it
was empty. We came in and of course he did his
customary Frank Hubert thing with his hands
together. And he began to ask me questions. And
when we got through talking, and my wife was with me
again, and my wife has never been known to be quiet.
She would not, that just wasn't her. She actually
was an introvert, but she was very extroverted in
her behavior. And the two of them carried on a nice
conversation as well. But as we finished, he asked
me if I had any questions. And I said that I did, that
I'd like to know what the load expectation was,
what the teaching load was. No, I'm sorry. I want to
know what the research responsibility was.
Because 1972, if you recall, was just about the
time when that pendulum started swinging. And he
said that it was a considerable research
responsibility. And then he kind of looked at me
out of the corner of his eye and said, do you have a
problem with that? And I told him that I wasn't sure
that I did, depending on what the teaching load
was. And he said, well, it's 12 hours. And I'd been
carrying 15. And 12 hours sounded pretty good.
When we finished, I don't guess I made a very good
impression on him. Or maybe I asked some of the
wrong questions. Because years later, Carl
Landis told me that when we walked out, Hubert
looked at him and said, you don't want ponder, do
you? And Carl said, yes, I do. And Carl told me that
in the spirit that it wasn't long before that Frank
Hubert had named me department head. And
apparently I made the team somewhere along the
way. Go back to what do you recall about the
interview process with Carl Landis?
interesting thing about that he had just he'd had a
guy named charles corbin and that name might need
to be erased in the final draft you may know it may
remember him chuck was a very good teacher and and
the students really related to him very well but he
was kind of a an outlaw in on the faculty he didn't
have much respect for any authority and Now, I
wasn't here then, but I heard all the stories. And
Carl had been burned by him pretty badly. And rules
were not for Charles. And so in looking back at the
interview, I understand it better now than I did
then. But he asked me a lot of questions about how I
felt about a faculty member's role and an
administrator's role and those kinds of things.
But the thing that really disturbed me the most was
that the first year I felt kind of shut out. I felt he
was really cold to me. From my perspective, I'd
worked in a university where a new faculty came in
and they were kind of given the exalted seat for a
while and a lot of attention and welcoming. I never
felt that the whole time I was there. Later I
discovered that Carl wanted to be sure that he
never got behind the eight ball with another
faculty member. And he was a little concerned
about that. Did you get from this first visit, this
interview visit, did you get any perception of
what the guidelines, the rules, the expectations
were for a new faculty member?
I think so. Not to the extent that probably I would
have liked to. I knew from the interview that you
were going to work from 8 to 5. You were going to be in
your office from 8 to 5, probably. No one was going
to go up and down checking on you, but that was the
expectation. I also learned, much to my dismay,
that when the students were gone, that doesn't
necessarily mean the faculty were gone. That was
not modeled anywhere in the country, I suppose.
They made very clear to me what the teaching load
was and what the expectations in the classroom
were, and they didn't equivocate about that. That
was laid out pretty closely. The thing that
impressed me more than anything and probably
removed all doubt was before I left that day, he
made me an offer. and told me what the money was.
This is the only dollar question all day. All day,
that's right. What was the opening salary, the
beginning salary? Opening salary was 17,000. For
12 or nine? For 12 months. For 12 months. Now he made
me the offer and made me the sour quote. I didn't
expect either of those. And instead I had to say I
need to think about it. Someone, a wise person told
me one time never take a job during an interview
because you'll take every job you interview for
that way. And so when I went back home we thought
about it and decided to take the job. And then when
he made the offer, when he actually sent me the
letter, he had upped it $500. So he quoted me
$17,000, paid me $17,500, and I've never
forgotten that. And that added to the plus. Oh, no
question. And I used that a few times when I was
department head. If I could e-cap another $200 or
$300 for someone we were interviewing, I always
dumped it in because it's a nice message to send.
Make believe that I didn't know Carl Landis.
Describe him. in your first impressions and then
later. Okay. Very dignified, very matter of fact
and to the point, doesn't waste words, economy of
words.
very high morals, expects people around him to
behave that way. A
gentleman in every respect. A military man. He was
in the military, but later I don't call him, I
wouldn't consider him a military person, but he
behaved like a military person. As I got to know
him, And this was years later. I discovered that he
was pretty much a pussycat, very soft-hearted, a
kind man, a
little bit unsure of himself. And probably that's
why he was so formal. Formality gave him some
structure that he liked.
Now, did you call any friends or anything to find
out information about him? Actually, I talked to
my major professor at Tennessee. He was the only
person I talked to. What did they say? What did he
say? He said that he thought it was a good school,
but don't forget, Leonard, it's a military
school. I remember this is 1972 and the military
was out of favor at that point. He said that your
degree is health education, your discipline is
health education, and I don't really believe
they're committed to health education at A&M. I
think they have health just because it may look
good. Now, that was an indictment on the
department, not on the university.
But the good thing about it is I knew a lot about A&M
because being in a general proximity of the state,
I watched them come over and play LSU football And I
was always in the Army with an Aggie who, in fact, I
served under an Aggie who I thought was one of the
best commanders I ever had. So I knew a lot already
about them. Then my undergraduate alma mater, the
guy who was department head at my undergraduate
university was a classmate of mine, a former
classmate. And he knew a lot about A&M. And I really
depended on him more than anyone else. Did you hear
any, other than the possibility of the emphasis on
military, did you hear any other negatives about
A&M as you were trying to check up and learn things?
I don't think I heard anything negative. And I
probably didn't explore it as deep as someone who
didn't know much about the university would have.
And this is the fall of 72. One of the ironies is that
Jack Williams, the comparatively new president,
had just been the chief academic officer of the
University of Tennessee system. That's right,
and I knew that. Before coming. I knew that, but I
wouldn't have called him. No way I would have
called him. I understand. I was a student. When he
was at Tennessee, I was a student. In fact, he left
there while I was a student. Now, the name of the
official title of the department when you arrived
was what? Health and Physical Education. And it
offered, in general, what did the department in
those days offer when you arrived? It had one
undergraduate degree, and it was health and
physical education. People who went through that
primarily were prepared to be teachers. And it was
primarily to teach physical education. There was
also, I counted there were 11 health courses
offered, but only six hours in the curriculum at
that time. We had no degree in health, but a number
of people would take those courses, some of the
elective courses, to beef up their health
background. Supposedly, they were certified to
teach both health and physical education, but
they were really qualified to teach physical
education. At the graduate level, we had also a
degree in health and physical education, and the
doctoral level was just health and physical
education. And the doctoral degree was already at
that time? It was already at that time. It was brand
new. I think they were in their third year. Was it an
Ed.D. or a Ph.D. or both? It was both. It was both.
And do you have any guesstimate when you got here
what the enrollment was in number of majors? As a
matter of fact, I do. I brought some cheats. I know
I wrote that number down.
Well, in 1979, we had 160 health majors, 535
physical education. So that's 685, isn't it? And
that was twice as many as we had in 1972. So it's half
685, whatever that is. I can't do that. And were
there many graduate students when you arrived?
Not many. They'd had a brand new doctoral program.
Their first class had just about graduated. A few
strikers from the first class left. And there was
about six or eight of those fellows out there. All
of them were men. The only woman PhD student at that
time was Gail Smith. You know Norma Gail, I think.
S-C-H-M-I-D-T? S-C-H-M-I-D-T, yeah. All right,
now... This offer came at about what time on the
calendar? This was late July. And they needed you
here when? Mid-August. So describe what the
routine was for you and wife and young child to get
over here. Well, we had just built a house. We'd
been in it two years, I guess. We built it and then
took a leave of absence, went to Tennessee. So we'd
only lived in it about two years. We had to sell that
house. And that was, of course, a scramble. But
fortunately, I never had to put it on the market.
There was someone in the neighborhood who wanted
to buy it. I actually came earlier than they wanted
me to. I finished my duties at Southeastern in
about mid-July. Maybe it was later than that.
Maybe it was toward the end of July. And I had no
other responsibilities to the university after
that. So I packed my bags and came to A&M. I got here
sooner than Carl expected me to. And I remember
going up two or three. And I didn't realize they
were still in summer session. I thought they were
out of summer session, too. And I'd come up and look
for my office. Well, it's not ready yet. And two or
three days, I would do that. We were getting real
crowded over there then, and so I discovered after
I got here I was going to have to share an office with
someone else. What was it like to move? Did you move
yourself or a commercial? No, someone moved me. I
hired a Mayflower company to move in. Of course, no
help from A&M. Describe what the housing
opportunities were here. What did you find?
Actually, it turned out pretty good. We came over
here and met with a realtor who happened to be
Robert Smith's brother. It was Robert's wife. I'm
forgetting her name for some reason. I don't know
why. Richard was just getting his operation going
good. She showed us around the neighborhood and it
was very good. There were several houses open at
that time. But, you know, $40,000. And I paid like
18 for mine. And there was just no way I could swing
that. But what I didn't know, being as young as I
was, is when I sold my house, I sold it for 35. So I
could have done that. But we really wanted to rent.
And we made that known very early. And much to my
surprise, she worked with us on that and found us a
rent house,
which was good marketing on her part. Because
later on, when I got ready to buy a house, I went
straight to her and asked her to have the deal. Do
you remember what that rent was? Gosh, it was about
150. In College Station or in Bryan? It was in
Bryan. It was in Bryan. I wanted to get out of
College Station because I wanted to get out and
know some of the people that were not university
people. Same here. And I don't know if what
happened to you happened to me, but what happened
to me happened to you. But when I finally built a
house, or bought a house, it was over on Memorial
Drive near St. Joseph. And nearly everybody over
there worked for the university anyway. But we've
enjoyed Brian, I'm not sorry I did that. Alright,
so as you first went to the office, describe the
facilities and the offices and so forth for the
entire department. They're not good facilities
at all. We were in a new building where I'd come from
and I was a little disappointed to find that I had to
be partnered with someone and share an office.
Turned out to be a good thing because that was a guy
named Robert Hurley who was at that time chair of
the health education program. And we got to be good
friends because we were able to work together.
Classrooms, the chairs were nailed down,
military listed seats, noisy. And I had visions I
was going to change all that. I was going to bring
the light of day to this place. That's obviously
what I discovered very quickly. I wasn't going to
do that. They were satisfied with where they'd
done things. And where was this? This was all in G.
Riley White, which was an old building then, of
course. Well, it was built in the 50s, and this was
72. But I also learned... Everything negative I
heard about A&M I heard after I got here. And there
were things that I didn't think was all that
negative. One of the first things I heard was
General Rutter's famous statement about Highway
6 goes both ways. And to be honest with you, I kind of
like that. At first, what did you think that really
meant, implied? Well, it was told to me in a context
that it was tainted by the way this person
interpreted it to me. But he was being very
critical of Rutter. He had come from University of
Illinois and couldn't understand why A&M
couldn't be more like Illinois. And he
interpreted and expressed it to me as though you
don't dare speak up around here. You say it the way
we want to hear it and otherwise leave it alone. And
that may have been the way it was said. I didn't
serve under General Rutter. He had died the year
before I got here and Jack Williams was was
president. And I really liked him.
There's been a lot of good presidents since I've
been here, but he was really, really fun to go to a
faculty meeting when he was in China. Let's go
ahead and talk about him. Make believe I didn't
know him and describe him. I'll never forget the
first time I met him was at the new faculty dinner.
Were those not great occasions? I don't know if
they still do that or not, but boy, that was really a
neat day. I hear they don't. That's too bad,
because my wife and I were invited, of course, and
we didn't know anyone except just a few people we'd
met in the department. And we all filed in, and I saw
that spread, and I could not believe what they had
done. Now, keep in mind that what I was
experiencing in the department was kind of a cold
shoulder, you know, we're not going to, Now, I was
introduced last in the faculty meeting, for
example. I fully walked in expecting to be the
first one introduced because I was new. Well, that
wasn't what happened. Well, here was, that had
been turned around 180 degrees. I mean, they're
treating you like you're the most special person
ever. Jack Williams addressed us after dinner,
and I have never laughed so hard in my life. I don't
remember everything he said, but I know a couple of
stories that he told. One was, He said that some of
you know that I've only been president here for
just about a year. He said, when I first got here, I
got a letter from a guy. You've heard the story
about him. Please go ahead. I got a letter from the
guy who said, Dr. Williams, when I first heard that
you were going to be president and you weren't even
an Aggie, I didn't like it very much. But since I've
been reading about you and Aggie, I think you might
do. But I want you to know I'm watching you damn
close. And he'd tell that and just beam as he said
it. And then another story he told was he said, you
know, in administration, friends come and
friends go, but enemies accumulate. And I've
carried that with me a long, long time. But the
whole evening was just really good. All right. And
the result of that evening in your feelings was
what? What did you and your wife think when you
drove? Very, very positive. Very positive. There
was no... I was beginning to wonder if I had made the
right move. But that evening turned that thinking
around almost entirely. But you asked me about
Jack Williams. I was being a new assistant
professor. I didn't have a lot of interaction with
him. Nearly all the interaction I had was formal.
But he had a delightful sense of humor. a great
speaking voice, put you at ease, or at least I felt
he put you at ease very quickly. I found out later
that he also was a tough nut to crack. You had to have
your duck lined up to get through that gentleman.
It really was It really was too bad that his health
turned the way it did, because he had this
university movement in leaps and bounds. Let me
add in, this is an editorial note. I was at that
point a new administrator. My title was Assistant
Vice President for Academic Affairs. And as we
were looking forward that fall to planning the
faculty orientation, One day I went in Dr.
Williams' office and he told me to take charge of
that. And I began to tell him how poorly it had been
done in the past. And so he said, if you know so much
about how it ought to be done, you plan it. So what we
tried to do was to have a day of a bit of a tour of the
campus for new faculty and spouses and to
encourage as many of them to come as possible. and
to take them to a few of the places where the average
faculty member wouldn't ever get to go. Then that
evening, to have a formal dinner, everyone dress
up, department heads, new faculty, deans, and so
forth, and then have Dr. Williams make one of those
speeches that he could do so well. And then I think I
said on that first one, I know I did in the later
ones, And conclusion, ladies and gentlemen, this
evening will be a success if, when you are driving
home this evening, one of you looks at the other and
says, honey, I'm kind of glad we're here. Our hope
was to get everybody off to a positive start and to
begin to build a feeling of community, of working
together. And Dr. Williams was so encouraging in
that regard that it made it an effort of joy.